વિક્રમ શેઠ એક ભારતીય નવલકથાકાર અને કવિ છે. He has written several novels and poetry books. He has received several awards including Padma Shri, Sahitya Akademi Award, Pravasi Bharatiya Samman, WH Smith Literary Award and Crossword Book Award. Seth's collections of poetry such as "Mappings" and "Beastly tales", are notable contributions to the Indian English language poetry Canon.
Vikram Seth was born on 20 June 1952 to Leila and Prem Seth in Calcutta . He spent part of his childhood in Patna since his parents were posted there for a while. He attended St. Xavier's High School.
Seth spent part of his youth in London and returned to India in 1987. He received primary education at Welham Boys' School and then moved to The Doon School. While at Doon, Seth was the editor-in-chief of The Doon School Weekly. After graduating from The Doon School in India, Seth went to Tonbridge School, England to complete his A-levels, where he developed an interest in poetry and learned Chinese. After obtaining a degree from Corpus Christi College, Oxford, Seth moved to California to work on a graduate degree in economics at Stanford University. He then went on to study creative writing at Stanford and classical Chinese poetry at Nanjing University in China.
Having lived in London for many years, Seth now maintains residences near Salisbury, England, where he is a participant in local literary and cultural events, having bought and renovated the house of the Anglican poet George Herbert in 1996, and in Jaipur, India.
In 2006, he became a leader of the campaign against Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, a law against homosexuality. Leila Seth, his mother wrote about Seth's sexuality and her coming to terms with it in her memoir.
His younger brother, Shantum, leads Buddhist meditational tours. His younger sister, Aradhana, is a filmmaker married to an Austrian diplomat and has worked on Deepa Mehta's movies Earth and Fire. 
Seth detailed in an interview in the Australian magazine Good Weekend that he has studied several languages, including Welsh, German and, later, French in addition to Mandarin, English and Urdu, which he reads and writes in Nasta'liq script. He plays the Indian flute and the cello and sings German lieder, especially Schubert.
Seth's former literary agent Giles Gordon recalled being interviewed by Seth for the position:
Vikram sat at one end of a long table and he began to grill us. It was absolutely incredible. He wanted to know our literary tastes, our views on poetry, our views on plays, which novelists we liked.
Seth later explained to Gordon that he had passed the interview not because of commercial considerations, but because unlike the others he was the only agent who seemed as interested in his poetry as in his other writing. Seth followed what he has described as "the ludicrous advance for that book" with £500,000 for An Equal Music and £1.4 million for Two Lives. He prepared an acrostic poem for his address at Gordon's 2005 memorial service.

