વિકિપીડિયાના માપદંડ મુજબ ઊચ્ચ કક્ષાનો લેખ બનાવવા માટે આ લેખમાં સુધારો કરવાની જરૂર છે. યોગ્ય સુધારો કરીને આ સંદેશો કાઢી નાંખો. ટાઇપ કરવા અંગે મદદ માટે પાનાંનુ સંપાદન કરવાની રીત તેમજ "કેવી રીતે" શ્રેણીના લેખ જુઓ. 


યુરોપનો એક સમૃદ્દ દેશ. જર્મની મધ્ય યુરોપીય દેશ છે. તેની ઉત્તર સરહદે ઉત્તર સમુદ્ર, ડેનમાર્ક, અને બાલ્ટીક સમુદ્ર, પુર્વી સરહદે પોલેન્ડ અને ઝેક પ્રજાસત્તાક, દક્ષીણે ઓસ્ટ્રીઆ અને સ્વિત્ઝરલેન્ડ; અને પશ્ચિમે ફ્રાન્સ, લુક્સેમબર્ગ, બેલ્જિયમ, અને નેધરલેન્ડ સ્થિત છે. 
Germany, officially the Federal Republic of Germany ), is a country in Central Europe. It is bordered to the north by the North Sea, Denmark, and the Baltic Sea; to the east by Poland and the Czech Republic; to the south by Austria and Switzerland; and to the west by France, Luxembourg, Belgium, and the Netherlands. The territory of Germany covers 357,021 square kilometers and is influenced by a temperate seasonal climate. With 81.8 million inhabitants in January 2010, it has the largest population among member states of the European Union, and it is also home to the third-largest number of international migrants worldwide.
A region named Germania, inhabited by several Germanic peoples, has been known and documented before AD 100. Beginning in the 10th century, German territories formed a central part of the Holy Roman Empire, which lasted until 1806. During the 16th century, northern Germany became the centre of the Protestant Reformation. As a modern nation-state, the country was first unified amidst the Franco-Prussian War in 1871. In 1949, after World War II, Germany was divided into two separate states—East Germany and West Germany—along the lines of Allied occupation. Germany was reunified in 1990. West Germany was a founding member of the European Community in 1957, which became the European Union in 1993. It is part of the Schengen zone and adopted the European currency, the euro, in 1999.
Germany is a federal parliamentary republic of sixteen states . The capital and largest city is Berlin. Germany is a member of the United Nations, NATO, G8, G20, OECD, and the WTO. It is a major power with the world's fourth largest economy by nominal GDP and the fifth largest in purchasing power parity. It is the second largest exporter and third largest importer of goods. In absolute terms, Germany allocates the second biggest annual budget of development aid in the world, while its military expenditure ranked seventh. The country has developed a high standard of living and established a comprehensive system of social security. It holds a key position in European affairs and maintains a multitude of close partnerships on a global level. Germany is recognised as a scientific and technological leader in several fields.
ઢાંચો:Sprotect2ઢાંચો:Redirect6
