હિંદુ ધર્મમાં ઉપાસના એ કોઈ એક કે વધુ દેવી દેવતા પ્રત્યેનું ભક્તિકર્મ છે. સામાન્ય રીતે એને ભક્તિ કે ભક્તિમય પ્રેમ કહી શકાય. હિંદુ ધર્મમાં ઉપાસના એ મુખ્ય કે કેન્દ્રસ્થ ક્રિયા કહી શકાય. ઉપાસના એ મૂળ સંસ્કૃત શબ્દ છે જેની વ્યુત્પત્તિ જોઈએ તો, ઉપ=નજીક અને આસ =બેસવું, અર્થાત નજીક બેસવું એવો થાય છે. તત્વતઃ અહીં એનો અર્થ ઈશ્વરીય શક્તિ કે ઇષ્ટદેવનું સ્મરણ; ધ્યાન ધરવું એવો થાય છે. અંગ્રેજી કે સંસ્કૃત કુળથી અલગ એવી અન્ય ભાષાઓમાં એનો ચોક્કસ અર્થ સમજાવવો અઘરો પડે છે. 
ઉપાસનાને વધુ ઊંડાણથી સમજીએ તો, ઉપાસના એટલે આરાધના સેવા ભક્તિ આદિથી કરવામાં આવતી ધ્યાન વગેરે પ્રક્રિયા ઈશ્વર સાથેનો સંબંધ. ઈશ્વરની મરજીને અધીન થવાની મનની વૃત્તિ. 
હિંદુ ધર્મમાં મૂર્તિના સ્વરૂપે વિશાળ સંખ્યામાં દેવી દેવતાઓની પૂજા કરવામાં આવે છે. આ દેવી દેવતાઓ બ્રહ્મસ્વરૂપ, ઈશ્વરીય અવતાર કે પછી નોંધપાત્ર શક્તિશાળી મહાત્માઓ હોઈ શકે છે. અલગ અલગ દેવતા પ્રત્યેની શ્રદ્ધા કે માન્યતા આલગ અલગ સંપ્રદાય કે તત્વજ્ઞાન પ્રમાણે બદલાય છે. મહદાંશે આ દેવી દેવતાઓની વિભાવના મનુષ્ય કે અંશતઃ મનુષ્યરૂપની મૂર્તિ સ્વરૂપે કરાઈ હોય છે. આ દેવી દેવતાઓ ભિન્ન જણાતા છતાં સરવાળે તો તે એક જ બ્રહ્મ કે ઈશ્વરનું સ્વરૂપ ગણાય છે. અને આ દેવસ્વરૂપ કે તેની પૂજા અર્ચના અંતે તો એ એકમાત્ર ઈશ્વરીય તત્વ સાથેના સંવાદરૂપ જ ગણાય છે.  
હિંદુધર્મમાં, મૂર્તિ એટલે, ચિત્ર કે ધાતુ, પથ્થર, લાકડું, હાથીદાંત વગેરેની બનાવેલી શરીરપ્રતિમા, પૂતળું, બાવલું, જેવા શિલ્પ સ્વરૂપે, દૈવીઆત્માને વ્યક્ત કરતું સ્વરૂપ. દૈવી ભક્તિમાર્ગમાં મૂર્તિપૂજાના માધ્યમે ઈશ્વર સાથે વ્યક્તિગતપણે ઊંડો પ્રેમસંબંધ જોડવાની લાગણી મધ્યસ્થ હોય છે. મૂર્તિને ઈશ્વરનું સ્વરૂપ માની ભક્ત તેની સેવાપૂજા કરે છે, સવારે મૂર્તિને જગાડે છે, સ્નાન, શણગાર, ભોજન, પ્રસાદ, આરતિ, શયન જેવી વિધિઓ દ્વારા મૂર્તિના માધ્યમે ઈશ્વર સાથેનો પોતાનો પ્રેમસંબંધ અને ભક્તિભાવ વ્યક્ત કરવાનો આશય હોય છે. આર્ય સમાજ અને બ્રહ્મોસમાજ જેવા કેટલાંક હિંદુ સંપ્રદાયો મૂર્તિપૂજાને નકારે છે, અને તેને ’ઢિંગલા ઢિંગલીના ખેલ’ સાથે સરખાવે છે.
Pūjā or alternative transliteration Pooja is a religious ritual performed by Hindus as an offering to various deities, distinguished persons, or special guests. It is done on a variety of occasions and settings, from daily puja done in the home, to temple ceremonies and large festivals, or to begin a new venture. Puja is modeled on the idea of giving a gift or offering to a deity or important person and receiving their blessing . The puja ritual is performed by Hindus worldwide. 
Aarti is a Hindu religious ritual of worship, a part of puja, in which light from wicks soaked in ghee or camphor is offered to one or more deities. Aarti is generally performed one to five times daily, and usually at the end of a puja or bhajan session . It is performed during almost all Hindu ceremonies and occasions. It involves the circulating of an 'Aarti plate' or 'Aarti lamp' around a person or deity and is generally accompanied by the singing of songs in praise of that deva or person . In doing so, the plate or lamp is supposed to acquire the power of the deity. The priest circulates the plate or lamp to all those present. They cup their down-turned hands over the flame and then raise their palms to their forehead - the purificatory blessing, passed from the deva's image to the flame, has now been passed to the devotee.
Darśana or Darshan is a Sanskrit term meaning "sight", vision, apparition, or glimpse. It is most commonly used for theophany - "manifestation / visions of the divine" in Hindu worship, e.g. of a deity, or a very holy person or artifact. One could also "receive" darshana or a glimpse of the deity in the temple, or from a great saintly person, such as a great guru.
Homa is a Sanskrit word which refers to any ritual in which making offerings into a consecrated fire is the primary action. At present, the words homa/homam and havan are interchangeable with the word Yagna.
Yagya is a ritual of sacrifice derived from the practice of Vedic times. It is performed to please the gods or to attain certain wishes. An essential element is the sacrificial fire - the divine Agni - into which oblations are poured, as everything that is offered into the fire is believed to reach the gods. A Vedic yajna is typically performed by an adhvaryu priest reciting Vedic verses. Usually, there will be one or three fires in the centre of the offering ground. Among the items offered as oblations in the yajna include large quantities of ghee, milk, grains, cakes or soma. The duration of a yajna depends on the type; some can last a few minutes, hours or days and some even last for years. Some yajnas are performed privately, others with a large number of people in attendance.
Substances that are commonly used in Hindu worship include ghee, incense, kumkum, Marigold, milk, sandalwood, tulsi and vibhuti. Among objects used are the altar, banana leaves, bhog, coconuts, diya, fly-whisks, garlands, prasad, shankha and tilaka.
Prasād is a mental condition of generosity, as well as a material substance that is first offered to a deity and then consumed. Literally, a gracious gift. The prasad has the deity's blessing residing within it. In contemporary Hindu religious practice in India, the desire to get prasada and have darshan are the two major motivations of pilgrimage and temple visits.
The tilaka, tilak or tika is a mark worn on the forehead and in some cases to the upper part of the head. Tilaka may be worn on a daily basis or for special religious occasions only, depending on different customs. The tilaka symbolizes the third eye, or mind's eye, associated with many Hindu gods, and the idea of meditation and spiritual enlightenment. In the past, tilakas were usually worn by gods, priests, ascetics, or worshippers, but is now a common practice for most Hindus. It can express which Hindu tradition one follows. It may be made with sandalwood paste, ashes, kumkum, sindoor, clay, or other substances.
There are three species of sacred trees, pipal, banyan, and neem. The trunks of the neem trees will be wrapped in decorative red cloth that has been offered to a goddess and a brass human mask will be added to the tree. Decorative paint is applied to the face, while garlands of marigolds and jasmine flowers are strung around the tree. People worship the neem tree as Shitala for good health and protection from dangerous sicknesses.  Tree worshipers tend to gravitate towards one tree in particular that they feel a connection with as an intimate individual. 
A Bhajan is any type of Indian devotional song. It has no fixed form: it may be as simple as a mantra or kirtan or as sophisticated as the dhrupad or kriti with music based on classical ragas and talas. It is normally lyrical, expressing love for the Divine. The name, a cognate of bhakti, meaning religious devotion, suggests its importance to the bhakti movement that spread from the south of India throughout the entire subcontinent in the Moghul era.
Kirtan is call-and-response chanting or "responsory" performed in India's devotional traditions. A person performing kirtan is known as a kirtankar. Kirtan practice involves chanting hymns or mantras to the accompaniment of instruments such as the harmonium, tablas, the two-headed mrdanga or pakawaj drum, and karatal hand cymbals. 
A mantra is a sound, syllable, word, or group of words that is considered capable of "creating transformation" . Its use and type varies according to the school and philosophy associated with the mantra. Mantras originated in the Vedic tradition of India. The most basic mantra is Aum, which in Hinduism is known as the "pranava mantra," the source of all mantras. 
Mantra japa was a concept of the Vedic sages that incorporates mantras as one of the main forms of puja, or worship, whose ultimate end is seen as moksha . Essentially, mantra japa means repetition of mantra, and it has become an established practice of all Hindu streams. It involves repetition of a mantra over and over again, usually in cycles of auspicious numbers, the most popular being 108.
In the context of Hinduism, the term vrata denotes a religious practice to carry out certain obligations with a view to achieve divine blessing for fulfillment of one or several desires. Etymologically, vrata, a Sanskrit word, means to vow or to promise. A vrata may consist of one or more of several actions. Such actions may include complete or partial fasting on certain specific days; a Yatra to a particular place or places; a visit, darśana and puja at a particular temple or temples; recitation of mantras and prayers; performing yajnas.
Hindus observe sacred occasions by festive observances. All festivals in Hinduism are predominantly religious in character and significance. Many festivals are seasonal. Some celebrate harvest and birth of God or heroes. Many are dedicated to Shiva and Parvati, Vishnu and Lakshmi and Brahma and Saraswati
Yātrā generally means pilgrimage to holy places such as confluences of sacred rivers, places associated with Hindu epics such as the Mahabharata and Ramayana, and other sacred pilgrimage sites. Tīrtha-yātrā refers to a pilgrimage to a holy site, and is generally undertaken in groups. One who goes on a yatra is known as a yatri. A yatra is a kamya ritual; it is desirable, but not obligatory, for a Hindu to perform it. One can go on a yatra for a variety of reasons, including festivals, to perform rituals for one's ancestors, or to obtain good karma. To traditional Hindus, the journey itself is as important as the destination, and the hardships of travel serve as an act of devotion in themselves. Visiting a sacred place is believed by the pilgrim to purify the self and bring one closer to the divine.

