ગુજરાત અને ભારતમાં સ્થાન
કરમસદ ભારત દેશના પશ્ચિમ ભાગમાં આવેલા ગુજરાત રાજ્યના ચરોતર પ્રદેશમાં આવેલા આણંદ જિલ્લામાં આવેલા કુલ ૮ તાલુકાઓ પૈકીના એક એવા આણંદ તાલુકામાં આવેલું એક શહેર છે. ભારતના સ્વતંત્રતા સેનાની અને લોખંડી પુરુષ તરીકે ઓળખાતા પ્રસિદ્ધ રાજનેતા સરદાર વલ્લભભાઈ પટેલ કરમસદના વતની હતા. તેઓ નવાધરામા રહેતા હતા. તેમનુ ઘર જોવાલાયક સ્થળ છે.
Karamsad is a city and a municipality in Anand district in the Indian state of Gujarat. It is part of the Chchagaam Gol .
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, one of India's greatest leaders in the Indian Independence Movement grew up in Karamsad. It was also the home of his elder brother Vithalbhai Patel, who was also an important political leader. The Patel brothers lived with their two elder brothers and one younger brother and sister, and parents Jhaverbhai and Ladba Patel in a mud-brick house adjacent to his family's farm holdings. This house is preserved to date as a memorial to Patel. The birth date of Karamsad or when Karamsad came into existence is not exactly known, but during the era of Kumarpal i.e. in 1155A.D., the village consisted mainly of people from Koli and other backward tribes. This community lacked proper agricultural skills. Because of this, they used to rob, steal or work as servants if opportunity permitted.
In 1211, Aja Patel, originally from Hilod, came over and settled here. Because of his skills, agricultural production increased and the village prospered.
The details henceforth from Aja Patel to Kupa Patel are not available, however Kupa Patel was from the twelfth or fourteenth generation of Aja Patel. Kupa Patel was an ardent devotee of Lord Shiva. He had got Lord Shiva's temple renovated, which was in ruins and situated in the western side of the village. That was well built by his son Lakha Patel. He had also helped build a lake in the village.
Devidas, a few generations down had two sons. Jibhai and Bajibhai. His sons asked the Moghul Governor of Ahmedabad Province to let them keep Karamsad for revenue collection. Out of them, Majibhai's four sons and their descendants got themselves distributed in six different Khadkis in Karamsad.
Six different Khadkis were formed in Karamsad after the six descendents of Mahijibhai.
૧ - ભાયની ખડકી 
2 - Bapni Khadki 
3 - Hathibhaini Khadki 
4 - Motabhaini Khadki 
5 - Jini Khadki 
6 - Chhatthi Khadki 
Another popular story goes like this - the original owner of the village was a Rajput. Mahijibhai Patel of the Uvarsad village, near Ahmedabad came and settled here. The Rajput community of the village did not like the arrival of Mahijibhai. They killed two of his six sons. Both of his brothers had actually gone to the Petlad court, where a case was filed against the Rajput community by Mahijibhai's sons. On their way back, they were killed by the Rajputs near Sandesar, where afterwards memorial pillars were built in their name. Today there are hardly any Rajputs in Karamsad. After the Patidars occupied most of the land in Karamsad, the Rajputs left and settled down in Napa village.
The original Patidars of Karamsad were physically very strong. They were known for their endurance and their ability to bear torture. One of Mahijibhai's sons suffered from a carbuncle. . During that time, antibiotics were not available, so the only way to treat it was to cauterize that part. The local method at that time was by heating an iron rod and applying it over the affected part instantly. During this, the person would lose all his calm and nerves. At that time, this procedure would involve 3-4 people tightly holding the patient. One of the Rajput in Napa village was known to do this procedure. However that son was brave, so when Mahjibhai's son was taken over there he said, "Nobody should hold me. I do not need any support. Nothing is going to happen to me."
The Rajput performing this procedure had kept the old rivalry between them in mind. So he overheated the iron rod and put it over the affected part with great vengeance. Mahijibhai's son bore it without uttering a single word. When the Rajput praised him for his enduring power, Mahijibhai's son said, "Do not praise me. I am nothing in comparison to my other brothers. Their endurance power is a lot greater than mine."
After this incident, the Rajput community in Napa village came to know about the strength of the Patidar community and they stopped creating trouble in and around Karamsad. When Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel was staying at Nadiad, which was his maternal native, he had suffered from Bubo of the armpit. He had also got it cauterized without uttering a single word. After all he was also from Karamsad.
During the making of Vallabh Vidyanagar, if the Patidars of Karamsad had not donated generously, then Vidyanagar would not have looked like what it looks today.
Karamsad has been quite under the influence of Swaminarayan Sect and Santram Temple for a long time. Both these sects do a lot of activities in Karamsad. Karamsad has always remained way ahead, be it in politics, education, religion, cooperative activities or industries in the Kheda District. The Patidars of Karamsad are well known in the social community of Chha Gam . The yesterday’s generation of Patidars have proved best themselves in different fields in Africa, Fiji, Myanmar, etc. the first two Patidars to reach East Africa in 1895 A.D. were Maganbhai Naranbhai and Ishwarbhai Nathabhai Patel. Today the Patidars of Karamsad are spread out in England, Canada, America and Australia.
Santram Temple in Karamsad is famous for its Convention Hall / Banquet Hall. The temple also provides health services to the people at a very nominal charge. It also runs coaching classes for students. Lots of students after getting coaching from these classes have got admissions in various engineering and medical colleges. A temple of Goddess Khodiyar – the presiding deity of Patidars has been recently built. It is also has various facilities and a big banquet hall, which can be used for marriage ceremonies. There are very few Digambar Jain Temples in the whole of Gujarat, but still there is a temple in Karamsad. Moreover there is a Swaminarayan Temple, Bapeshwar Mahadev, Catholic Mission, Mosque etc.
Karamsad is situated at 220 North latitude and 720 East longitude. It has a population of 14,000 people and has water works also, but in the past, people used to get water from different wells like Kharo Kuvo, Lakhvo Kuvo, Rabari No Kuvo, Moto Kuvo etc.






અક્ષાંશ-રેખાંશ: ૨૨.૫૫° N ૭૨.૯° E
