ઓરિસ્સા અને ભારતમાં સ્થાન
• ગીચતા
• 140/km2 
• વરસાદતાપમાન• ઉનાળો• શિયાળો
•   1,530 mm •   47 °C •   11.8 °C 
સંબલપુર જિલ્લો ભારત દેશના પૂર્વ દિશાના દરિયાકાંઠે આવેલા ઓરિસ્સા રાજ્યમાં આવેલા કુલ ૩૦ જિલ્લાઓ પૈકીનો એક મહત્વનો જિલ્લો છે. સંબલપુર જિલ્લાનું મુખ્ય મથક સંબલપુર શહેર ખાતે આવેલું છે. આ જિલ્લો મહાનદી નદી કાઠે આવેલો છે અને તેનું કુલ ક્ષેત્રફળ ૬,૭૦૨ કિ.મી છે જેમાં ૬૦% ભાગમાં ગીચ જંગલો આવેલા છે. સંબરપુર શહેર છત્તીસગઢ અને ઓરિસ્સા ને જોડે છે. ભૂતકાળમાં અહિં હિરાનો ઉધોગ વિકસેલો હતો પરંતુ હાલમાં અહિં કાપડ ઉધોગ વિકસ્યો છે. સંબલપુરી સાડી ખુબ વખણાય છે. વળી સંબલપુરી નૃત્ય અને ગાન પણ ખુબ વખણાય છે.
સમ્બલપુર નો ઉલ્લેખ ૨જી શતાબ્દીમાં ગ્રિક લેખક, પ્રવાસી, ગણિતશાસ્ત્રી, ખગોળવિદ પ્લોટેલ્મિના પુસ્તકમાં જોવા મળે છે. સમ્બલપુર પ્રથમ રાજાશાહી ધરાવતું જેને ૧૮૪૯માં ખાલસા કરવામાં આવ્યું અને બંગાળ રાજ્યમાં ભેળવી દેવાયું. અને ૧૯૩૬માં વળી તે ઓરિસ્સાનો ભાગ બન્યું. આજે તે રેડ કોરિડોરમાં સમાવિષ્ટ થાય છે.
In the district of Sambalpur a large numbers of Shiva temples were built during the Chauhan period. The most important amongst them were the Asta Sambhus in the undivided Sambalpur district as detailed below:-
An interesting feature of Saiva shrines found in Sambalpur area is "Non-Brahmin Priest" called Thanapati of Mali caste of these shrines .
The economy of Sambalpur District is basically dependent on agriculture and secondly on forests. Forests play an important role in the economy in terms of contribution to revenue, Domestic Product as well as dependence of people for livelihood. The people living adjacent to the reserved forests of Sambalpur Forest Division are heavily dependent on these forests. In the past Sambalpur has been a great centre of diamond trade. Kendu leaf is also produced in Sambalpur. Tendu leaf is one of the most important non-wood forest products of Sambalpur and is also called as green gold of Orissa. Lately industrialisation has started in the district and the prime industries of power, alumina and steel have been established. The place is famous for its globally renowned textile bounded patterns and fabrics locally known as Baandha. Sambalpur is famous for its Hand loom textile works. Popularly known as Sambalpuri Textile. It has earned international fame for its unique pattern, design and texture. Apart from textiles, Samabalpur has a rich tribal heritage and fabulous forestlands.
In 2006 the Ministry of Panchayati Raj named Sambalpur one of the country's 250 most backward districts . It is one of the 19 districts in Orissa currently receiving funds from the Backward Regions Grant Fund Programme .
According to the 2011 census Sambalpur district has a population of 1,044,410, roughly equal to the nation of Cyprus or the US state of Rhode Island. This gives it a ranking of 433rd in India . The district has a population density of 158 inhabitants per square kilometre . Its population growth rate over the decade 2001–2011 was 11.63%.Sambalpur has a sex ratio of 973 females for every 1000 males, and a literacy rate of 76.91%.
અહીયા બોલાતી ભાષાઓ અસુરી, an Austro-એશીયાઇ language spoken by approximately 17 000; and Bhunjia, spoken by approximately 7000 Bhunjia Adivasis.
The town of Sambalpur, lying 321 km from Bhubaneswar, is an ancient centre for the diamond trade is famous for its internationally renowned textiles, rich tribal heritage and fabulous forestlands. Sambalpur is easily accessible by rail and road.
Samaleswari, the presiding deity of this region is enshrined at 'Samalei Gudi' on the bank of Mahanadi River. The other temple of importance is the Budharaja Temple, dedicated to Lord Shiva and is perched atop the Budharaja hill. These temples are located at a few kilometres' distance from Sambalpur. The Hirakud Dam, the longest dam of the world, is some 15 kilometres from Sambalpur and can be easily visited on a day trip.
About 20 km from Sambalpur lies the Huma Temple which is a leaning structure, angling up to almost an astonishing 17 degrees. A mystery of engineers since the past few decades, it was made by the erstwhile ruler of Sambalpur.
 

